Good morning everybody.
My name is Scott Kovatch
and I am an engineer on the
Java runtime team here at Apple.
And I want to welcome you to this
session on Eclipse development on OS X.
We've got a lot of ground to cover today,
so let's get right into it.
Today we're going to cover
things at about the 10,000 foot
level and then very quickly go
down to about the 10 foot level.
So let's give you a look at what
we're going to talk about today.
So you've all come in here thinking,
yeah, I know what Eclipse is.
I use it every day or
I've heard about it.
But it's probably a little
bit more than your wear-up,
so we're going to talk a little
bit about that this morning.
We're going to talk about what
is new in the 3.2 release which
just happened earlier this year.
We're going to talk about the SWT,
which is sort of one of the core
widget foundations of Eclipse,
how it gets along with the AWT on OS X,
and a little bit more about
how the two actually interact.
We're going to talk about some things
that we've done this year in this area.
And finally,
we're going to have a little session
about how to contribute back to Eclipse.
We've got a good little demo plan
for you to basically show how you
can get involved in this project
as well as a Mac OS developer.
So let's start off with what is Eclipse?
I had a professor once in
college that always said,
you know, if you have something
that says intro to X,
you should always start out
your lecture with what is X.
So that's what I'm doing today.
What is Eclipse?
Well, you know, you looked at it,
probably downloaded it,
hopefully you all downloaded
it and had time to get it
before the session started.
and we know, you know,
when you go back to your manager
and say we want to use Eclipse
for our project as our IDE.
Well, what are the good things about it?
You know, it's open source, right?
It's one of the more high-profile
open source projects out there today.
It's written in Java.
It's a Java development environment,
of course.
It's an IDE, right?
You know, there was a time when,
you know, the concept of an IDE with
Java was just a...
Just a fleeting thought in somebody's
mind and IDs were really expensive.
and you had to pay, you know,
five and six hundred dollars
to do basic development.
And so, of course,
the big thing is it's free.
Well,
what I want to talk today about is that
it's more than just all those things.
This is sort of the,
what you see up here now is sort of
the mission statement of Eclipse,
if you will.
An open source community,
projects focused on providing a
vendor-neutral open development platform
and frameworks for building software.
And it's that last part I want to talk
to you a little bit about right now.
Eclipse,
when you download it from the server,
gives you a lot more than just an IDE.
Of course,
that's a big part of what you're getting.
But, you know, we have a Java IDE.
We have an underlying, and the Java IDE,
we'll show you a little bit more in
a few minutes in a demonstration.
But there's also a component
architecture underneath.
This is from something
called the OSGI initiative,
and OSGI is a specification for
module loading and unloading.
And it defines ways for you to
write code that can inject itself
into other applications and
basically an operating system,
if you will,
for modules and code that can load
and unload your code dynamically.
That's sort of it in a nutshell.
If you're interested in that,
you want to take a look
at the Equinox project,
which is part of Eclipse.org.
And they've got a lot of
material you can read up on that.
That's sort of the
foundation layer of Eclipse.
And that's something you can take
advantage of as well in your applications
if that's what you want to do.
And sort of the next level
up is something called a rich
client application architecture.
And the rich client architecture
Consists of a number of layers.
And sort of the eight
points you want to look at,
if you want to look at the RCP in
sort of eight simple points,
it's our component management,
which comes from the OSGI.
You have the runtime,
which is for developing applications.
It also has a mechanism for
[Transcript missing]
Let's sort of go through some of these
layers in a little bit more detail.
At the top most level is
the user interface layer,
and these are sort of the high level
things that actually Eclipse uses
itself to implement Eclipse the
way it looks to use it as an IDE.
We have a number of definitions and
plugins for defining your own editor,
so you can define an editor for your
specific language or your specific,
you know, whatever it is is
important for your domain.
perspective management so that
you can group together a number
of views related to a given task.
So, for example, in the IDE,
they have a Java perspective,
which opens up a series of views
for Java editing that makes
sense for a Java developer.
And so one level below that,
which I've sort of implicitly mentioned,
is the view layer which defines
the individual pieces that
go into that perspective.
So we have, you know,
like an outline view for
looking at your code.
[Transcript missing]
So the next level,
going over to the left,
which is more of the module
management side of the RCP,
the runtime layer is what takes
care of managing the extensions,
which are sort of a level pulled
up from the actual plugin.
But then we have the notion of
an application and a product,
and the RCP makes a
distinction between the two,
whereas an application
is a runnable unit.
Eclipse, for an example,
is an application.
Well, a product is a combination of
an application and a number of,
for example, unique branding things.
So a splash screen,
the unique icon for your application,
and just sort of extensions to help you
make a unique product based on the RCP.
And that's found over in this layer here.
So, I'm sorry,
going back over to the UI side,
Jface is a layer that basically
gives you a higher level way
of managing the user interface.
We'll jump ahead here to the SWT,
which is at the lowest level,
which is basically the widget library
that all RCP applications are based on.
We'll talk a lot more
about the SWT today,
but right now what you want to know
is that that's your basic UI toolkit
that all RCP applications are based on.
Go back over here, back up to JFace.
JFace is a layer above the
SWT that is a pure Java layer,
but it also lets you manage
SWT widgets a little bit more,
provide something of a model and
controller layer as opposed to just
the view that the SWT provides.
There are classes for managing list data,
tree data, things like that.
And basically,
it's an attempt to provide a view,
like I said,
more of a model actually than controller,
but sort of a model to
work with the SWT views.
And finally, at the lowest level is this
OSGI layer on the left,
and that's where you find all the
definitions for what are plugins
and the bundles and services that
you advertise to an application.
And it manages the loading and
unloading of those plugins.
All right.
So who is using Eclipse?
I mentioned we said, you know,
you can use Eclipse for
more than just an IDE.
Well, some pretty big names are
using Eclipse right now.
and no particular order here.
IBM, of course.
Eclipse is not an IBM project, however,
IBM is using Eclipse significantly
in a number of its products.
So you're going to see it
now being used for WebSphere,
for example,
and some of their other products.
PHP Eclipse is an open source project
that is writing a number of plugins
to do PHP development in Eclipse,
as well as providing the custom
editors and a debugger for PHP.
The first one is Wolfram
Research and Mathematica.
I thought this one was particularly
interesting because I think just
about everybody here has heard of
Mathematica at one point or the other.
It contains a scripting language for
dealing with mathematical formulas,
but what they've done is they have
produced a collection of plugins
that they call the Wolfram Workbench.
And this is,
I don't believe this is released yet,
but we were able to get a screenshot
to show you what's going on here.
And what you see up in the top left is,
I'm sorry, sort of the bigger layer here.
This is a screenshot of
debugging a Mathematica session.
So you've written your code
down in the center left there.
You've written a couple of functions,
and we're going to step
through that code and debug it.
So at the top right, we see the variables
that have been defined.
On the right is an outline of the
code that you've written to the left,
so you can click on those functions
and just jump to the function.
And down below is a console that
shows the results of interacting
with the mathematics engine.
and at the top left is
sort of the project view.
What they have done is they have
adapted a Mathematica workflow
to sort of the Eclipse paradigm,
if you will.
And they've defined a
plug-in that defines what a
project means to Mathematica.
They've written plug-ins for the
debugger so that when you set a
breakpoint and that breakpoint fires,
they know how to talk
to Mathematica and say,
you know, wait a minute,
now let's look at the data.
And this is sort of an example
of something you could do in your
application if this is within
your domain-specific needs.
This talks to the existing
Mathematica product.
They haven't actually rewritten
their product to put it into Eclipse.
But what they've done is they've
written a development environment
that talks to their existing product.
I thought this was a really interesting
example of using Eclipse for,
it's still an IDE,
but it goes beyond just, you know,
downloading it and
using it to write Java.
All right.
Let's move on a little bit to
talk about what came out in 3.2.
The Eclipse 3.2 was
also known as Callisto.
If you went to their download site and
you saw some information about Callisto,
it was released at the
end of June officially,
and this was the simultaneous
release of 10 projects.
Now that does not mean that
when you download Eclipse you
get 10 projects worth of code.
That would be a huge amount of code.
If you've downloaded it already,
you've got about 110, 115 megabytes.
The core of Eclipse is the
IDE and the OSGI and the OSG
[Transcript missing]
and you don't need all those
things just to run Eclipse,
but
What is important about Callisto is that
they were all released at the same time.
So in the past,
you may have wanted to use Visual Editor,
but it wasn't quite released yet,
so you were using a late beta,
but this other thing that you
relied on was actually done.
And so now they've harmonized everything
and released it all at the same time,
so everybody's starting
from the same base.
Mac OS X is now considered a
supported platform of Eclipse.
This is not true for,
I believe it is not true for most of 3.1,
but with 3.2, anything you file,
if you file bugs on it,
they will officially take a look
at it because they support OS X.
So to sort of give you an overview
of what's going on in 3.2 and sort of
an overview of the Java IDE itself,
I've asked Daniel Steinberg
from O'Reilly Media,
who's done a couple of interviews
with some people using Eclipse,
and he's also done a fair amount
of writing on Eclipse itself.
So Daniel, come on up and let's see
what's going on here.
Thanks Scott.
I get to take you out to recess,
so if you've got Eclipse loaded,
open it up and let's
play around a little bit.
From the welcome screen,
let's go to the workbench,
which is this little
guy here at the right.
and this should be a familiar view.
If you saw Ben and James talk
at the Java overview yesterday,
they talked about NetBeans
and IntelliJ's idea.
Here's another one of that trio that's so
strong on Mac OS X for Java developers.
So let's go ahead and
create a new project.
So from the file menu,
create a new project,
and let's call it WWDC.
Now, this gets me all the time.
You see a blue,
so you want to type it in.
This is not asking you to type
in the name of your project yet.
Select the type,
so select a Java project,
and at this point, type in WWDC,
and down here,
you'll see that you can choose which
JVM you want to target with your project,
and you'll see that it's pulling
them out of your system folder,
and so that you're getting one
six if you've got that loaded.
So within WWDC,
I can either right-click or
I can go to the file menu and
create a new package within it.
And again,
you can do this through wizards or
I'll show you in a minute something
new in 3.2 that actually is kind
of mind-blowing and fun for demos.
If you go to my .mac folder,
it's dim sum thinking,
you'll see a little clip file that
we weren't able to post elsewhere,
so we'll be using that in a little bit.
So let's just call this demo.
Oh, well, Eclipse is warning us that this
is pretty much discouraged.
You can call it demo with a capital D,
but that's discouraged,
and of course we know that we
should use lowercase letters.
So not only does it know the
absolute things that you get
out of strong typing with Java,
it also knows sort of conventions too.
So let's call this package demo.
You see it here on the left side,
and it's white because
there's nothing in demo.
So let's put something inside.
So for instance, let's...
see what we can put inside.
We can put a class, an interface, a num,
all the things that came
with 1.5 are now supported.
If you look at JUnit test case, no,
we're not going to do JUnit again, Alan,
but if you look at JUnit test case,
you'll see they now support
JUnit 4 and that's new in 3.2.
And so, if you click over to JUnit 4,
you'll see some things
change in this interface.
You've got two new methods
that are available and if you
go back to 3.8 for a minute,
you'll see that with JUnit 3.8,
you inherit from the class test case.
And with 4, you don't.
So,
let's just create a fake one for a quick
example here called this demo test.
Now, we've got another warning here
that the superclass doesn't exist.
And Eclipse makes it real easy for you.
It says, you know,
click here and you can add
JUnit 381 to your build path,
and it brings up the dialog.
So life gets much easier.
I know it's religious whether
you use a text editor,
whether you use VI or Emacs.
I know Emacs is an IDE for many of you,
but this does anticipate
many of your Java needs.
So now we have demo test in here,
and if you look here at the package,
it's now colored in yellow because the
package now does contain something.
So that's one way to create
a class using the wizard.
What I'd like to show you now
is something new that highlights
the fact that Eclipse understands
One of the benefits of Java,
you hear a lot about
dynamic languages now,
and those advantages,
and the duck typing,
and you just send a method,
and if it knows what to do, it does it.
The nice thing about Java is so
much is known at compile time,
and so what Eclipse does
is takes that further,
just as these other IDEs,
and says if we can know
it at compile time,
we can actually know
a lot at develop time.
So if you look at this code snippet here,
I'm just going to copy it,
and I'm going to paste it
right on top of this folder.
Now check this out.
It knew to create the package.
It knew to create the class inside of it.
And then it cut and pasted and
syntax highlighted the code.
So there's a lot of
intelligence going on.
It's picking all that up from
the code that you put in.
And if you look at the hierarchy,
here's the project that we just created.
And inside of it is the package
that was just automatically created.
And so there's this one-to-one.
Now, I never compiled this,
but you already see that
there's a class file here.
So Eclipse is doing a lot of
compiling sort of as you go.
Are we happy?
Gosh, yes.
Go on.
And so if we go to run this,
we'll run it as a Java application
and it's as simple,
squares a bunch of numbers in that
array and everything's lovely.
So let's make some changes to show
some of the other new features
that came with Eclipse 3.2.
Let's change this i to j++ just to
decouple this and you'll see that
I get a warning here because I've
introduced a variable and I've never
told you what that variable is.
So let Eclipse do some
of the lifting for you.
Let's click and see what's wrong with it.
If we just hover over it,
we should get the message
that j can't be resolved.
So let's see what Eclipse
thinks we should do about it.
One of the things we could do is create a
local variable and you see in that yellow
pop up that it even shows us what this is
going to look like after you've done it.
So let's go ahead and
create the local variable.
[Transcript missing]
Eclipse is now happy.
Now you see these
little boxes at the end?
This is another nice feature.
Boy, I don't remember what
this used to be before,
so if I hover over it,
I can see the quick diff with what
I used to have in the saved version.
And so you can see the sort of
maroon here shows a new line,
and the gray box here,
I don't know what color
it's supposed to be,
shows you a changed line,
and you can go back and see a quick diff.
Now once you've saved it,
so let me control S and save this,
that goes away because there's
nothing to quick diff against.
I guess that's where
Time Machine will have to come in.
So let's go ahead and run this.
And this is wrong.
Zero squared is zero,
zero squared is one,
zero squared is four.
The lesson here is just because
Eclipse has helped you make this
valid Java code doesn't mean that it's
made it do what you want it to do.
So you still have to
have sense about you.
So let's get rid of this line
that Eclipse has helped us write,
and let's uncomment out this line where
we've declared the variable there.
[Transcript missing]
and I'm going to clean up.
Now this is kind of magic,
and in the developer tools demo,
you saw a lot of this is coming
to Objective C through Xcode.
So here's the stuff that does
the same things for you for Java.
So you can do things like,
well let's look at clean up.
One of the things I can do is convert
for loops to enhanced for loops.
So let's go ahead and let it do that.
When I click next,
I can see what the before
and after looks like,
and you can see that it's
introduced a new iterator element,
and it's replaced by for loop with
the for int equals to this regular
iterator that was introduced in Java 1.5.
And so if I go ahead and finish that,
it's made the changes.
Now another nice thing you saw Ben do,
is he showed you that
IntelliJ is pretty smart.
And so what I've done here
is I've uncommented the line
up here with element in it,
because now I have three
instances of the name element.
You can see from the highlighting that
Eclipse knows the difference between
these elements and this element here.
And so if I do a refactoring,
and if you click on Refactor,
one of them is Rename.
And so I can rename this to Square.
Eclipse is smart enough to rename these
two elements square and not this one,
and so you're not just getting a grep.
You're not just using
a text editor anymore.
There's some deep understanding
of what your code means.
More?
Oh yes, let's go on.
Okay.
Yeah, I'm just mugging for you guys,
right?
Okay, so let's see, why don't we,
we've already replaced
I in that line above.
Let's change the system out.
[Transcript missing]
So I've got a call into MathSquareRoot.
Why?
Because it's a hokey example
to show you this next thing.
It's another new feature with Eclipse.
When you make calls into libraries
and the library function doesn't
do what you want it to do,
boy, it would be awfully nice
if you could fix that.
Now with OBSC,
we can do decorations and we can
do all sorts of tricks to say,
"Here's what I really wanted
that method to do." One of the
nice new refactorings in Eclipse
is I can introduce indirection.
And so in the refactoring menu,
you see "Introduce Indirection."
and it says what do you want
the new method name to be?
Well, I'll keep it a square root.
I'll hit the refactoring,
and now instead of
calling math.square root,
it calls into our local version,
and by default,
the local version does what this
function used to do in the old days.
And so now I can make my
changes here if I want.
And so that's kind of nice.
You can fix library functions
if you want to do something
like decorate a text field,
but you want to do it
for every text field.
Introducing indirection
not only changes the call,
but it changes all the
references to the call too.
And so that's a nice new feature.
Alright.
So let's look at some templating here.
And so let me introduce
the other snippet.
I'm just doing a simple shape.
I'm doing a square.
And so you can type this in yourself
or you can just cut and paste it.
I just love this feature.
So I'm going to cut it and
I'm going to paste it right
here in the package explorer.
And so now I have a shape.
I have a square.
Square doesn't do much.
It's got a side.
I set the side.
So let's see.
There's a lot of typing
I would have to do.
But you know what I'd really like?
I'd really like some getters and setters.
So I go to source code.
And there's an item that says
I can generate getters and setters.
So what do you want to generate them for?
Do you want to generate
getters and setters?
Or you can choose which ones.
So I say OK.
I automatically have my get and my set.
Actually, let me go back a second.
I want to do this a little differently.
Let me do it again.
Generate getters and setters.
But I do want to
generate method comments,
just to show you this next thing.
I want to introduce this notion of
category because you've got getters
and setters and then you've got
methods that really do something.
You don't want the getters
and setters cluttering up your
API because that's not the method
you want to be concentrating on.
I can introduce this new @category tag.
Eclipse will pick this
up if I write getter.
And I'll do the same
thing for the setter.
Here's another nice thing.
I'm hitting Return,
and notice when I hit Return it
knows I'm still within the comments.
So it indents, and it gives me the star.
It saves me typing there.
At,
it pulls up the things that can be added.
Category, and let's call this Setter.
Now, getter and setter never
existed before as categories.
I just made those up.
We can use any name that you want
to collect your different methods.
Again, it's sort of like how you group
things if you're writing an obc.
So let's save that.
And let me bring up the Outline view.
and you can see the getter and
setter now appear after the name.
But that's not the fun part.
The fun part is if you
click on this arrow,
you can decide which of the
methods you want to show.
So if I want to unshow the getters
and I want to unshow the setters,
all of a sudden I haven't
cluttered up the visible
methods that I get to mess with.
Scott, how are we doing for time?
Let me show you just
a couple more things,
but I think that's a
nice cool feature too.
The methods still exist,
but we know they exist.
We don't need to have
them right in our face.
Let me create a quick subclass of Square.
So let's create a new
class and let's call it,
I don't know, TinySquare.
And let's let it have
Square as the superclass.
So it extends square.
Something's wrong,
so I check out to see what's wrong.
Let's see,
what are you complaining about this time?
Do you want to add a constructor?
Oh, sure.
So it's added a constructor.
This still isn't quite right,
because a tiny square should
do stuff that the square does.
Well, by default, it does.
So I have to tell it
explicitly what to override,
and if you look here in the source file,
you'll see that I have
override or implement methods.
And when I do that,
a tiny square is a square,
but it's also an object,
so I can decide which of the
methods all the way up the
hierarchy I want to override.
In this case,
the area of a square is the area of
a square no matter how big it is,
but maybe I want to do
something different when
I draw it as a tiny square.
And so I'll click there,
and now I've overridden that.
We have the same collapsing that we
saw yesterday with the other IDEs.
Here's a nice little thing.
See that up arrow there?
That up arrow says that you
want to override the square,
but you've overridden
the method in the square,
and if you click on that,
it takes you to the method
that you've overridden.
So you can see and go back and
forth to the relevant code.
You'll also see the to-dos here.
The to-dos appear with
this little checkbox here,
or if you bring up your task list,
you can see all the to-dos that
you have to do there as well.
And so, that's just a quick tour through
Eclipse and some of the new features.
Thanks.
Thank you, Daniel.
So I hope that gives you a feel
for what you can do with Eclipse.
The thing about messing around with
a new environment is that it can
take you easily two weeks just to
look at all the great cool things,
and once you do that,
you've forgotten everything
you've learned in the old IDE.
Well, for me anyway.
All right,
let's move on a little bit to talk now,
going a little bit lower level,
talking about the
SWT and the AWT and OS X.
So the standard widget toolkit, SWT,
what is that?
That sort of gets thrown around
when you hear "Eclipse" as well.
And again, this is from the SWT page.
Efficient portable access to the user
interface facilities of the operating
system in which it is implemented.
Now behind that statement are a lot of,
I don't know, assumptions, if you will.
The SWT is built entirely on the
native toolkit on a given platform.
There's no peers, there's no theme,
no extra stuff, if you will.
It's a thin layer over the
user interface toolkit.
This is a different
philosophy than Swing.
You know, if you ask the SWT guys,
that's what they'll say.
This is a different philosophy
than what Swing did.
That's it.
No agenda, no politics, no nothing.
It's a different way of doing
things than what's funded.
That's all it is.
There is one API across all UI toolkits.
That means GTK on Linux,
Win32 on Windows,
[Transcript missing]
You should be able to open up an
AWT window from an SWT application,
and it should just work.
That wasn't always true on OS X.
For a long time, we actually started
out hostile to the SWT.
If an SWT application started up,
it starts up on the main thread or
the first thread of your application.
You try to use the AWT, boom,
we just throw an error.
You know, you started up wrong, go away,
we don't want to talk to you.
And as I was thinking
about the history of this,
how many have seen Seinfeld?
Right?
How many saw an episode,
actually two in the early
seasons with Keith Hernandez,
the boyfriend?
Well, the relationship between the
AWT and the SWT is pretty similar.
Alright?
I can't stand these guys.
You give them their number,
they don't call.
Why do they do that?
Right?
and Elaine's response, "I'm sorry,
honey." Right?
And that was sort of Apple's
response to people who complained
about this for a long time.
Sorry, doesn't work.
That's the way it is.
Live with it.
Well, we moved along a little bit.
You could use the AWT if you had
turned on AWT's headless mode.
Set Java.OughtHeadless = True.
Now you could use dimension, you know,
point, a few things like that.
That will let you do
some image processing.
That's better.
Well, we've been this way for
about two years now.
So the relationship moved
a little bit further now.
Hey,
you want to see a movie on Friday night?
Have you seen JFK?
Sure, that would be great.
And, you know, that's sort of where we
were for a long time.
We acknowledged each other's presence.
You know, we'd say hello to each other.
That's about it.
Well, earlier this year,
we released a version of
our Java that would allow an
SWT application to create a window.
You can create an AWT frame.
The two would live in
the same application.
Things are a lot better now.
We're back to the state
where I said before,
where this should just be
a normal part of things.
You know, he wants me to help him move,
but I don't feel right about it.
That's a big step.
That's like going all the way.
Well, yeah, that's about right.
We're making that final step here.
So what was that last step?
Next thing you know,
you'll be driving them to the airport.
I'm not driving them to the airport!
This metaphor falls apart because
actually they break up and they
don't want to see each other anymore,
but we don't want to do that.
All right.
If you've been following this whole saga,
then you know what this number means.
67384.
This was the bug in their
Bugzilla system that said the
SWT-AWT bridge was not implemented.
This was not the SWT team's fault.
This was our fault because we
never provided a way to do this.
Well, we've taken care of that.
We've implemented it.
And we did that earlier this
year with something called
the SWT Compatibility Pack.
We released that at Java 1 this year.
with great ceremony.
Anybody of you were at the
Mac OS X boff at Java 1.
And this is the
AWT support for the bridge.
We've got an add-on pack that
you would install into Java 5.
Did not modify your installed Java.
and it did the required,
it does require Java 5 release 4,
which was released shortly before that.
I'm going to show you a
little bit about what it does.
This is not exactly an exciting demo,
but it gives you an idea of what
we were trying to accomplish.
So I'm going to go over
here to this example,
and all I've done here is I've taken the
snippet 135 from the SWT snippets page,
and if you get some time,
you might want to look around there
because the snippets page consists of
a number of test cases that basically
show you how an SWT widget works.
So sort of the thinking is,
if we have 10,000
snippets that are small,
compact, and explain the API,
that's at least as good or
better than documentation.
Not that you don't need documentation,
but if you're like me,
I like to read code to
understand what's going on.
So here's an example of what's
going on with the bridge.
Here's the bridge.
And what we have here is, look down here,
which is where the action is.
Down here is where we
create an embedded shell.
I'm sorry,
we create a shell and get ready to
embed an AWT frame inside of it.
So we make up a
collection of SWT widgets,
and then down here,
We make an AWT frame that will be
embedded inside that composite.
We're going to add a text field
and show it in the window.
And we'll do another one down
here that creates a J table,
puts that inside of a panel
and inside of a frame,
and then finally an AWT label.
And I will run this.
Here we have our snippet application,
and this is just a simple file browser.
This is an SWT tree view
over here on the left.
And we'll sort of walk down and we
see this is just a Swing J table
with the Aqua look and feel.
I can resize the columns.
Expand that, and as I click on that,
it updates the model
over here on the right,
and I see my path up here,
and sort of just as an example
of some SWT widgets as well,
here's one of their buttons,
which brings up another shell,
which is like a modal dialog.
And so, you know, very straightforward.
I mean, I'm using the scroll wheel,
and because that's a native view,
it just works.
There's no extra work.
for you as a developer
to get that to happen.
and the rest of the team.
And that's pretty much it in a nutshell.
I mean,
I think it's important to note here that
SWT AWT bridge also implies Swing.
So you can write if you've got an
old Swing component that you need
to use or you bought a package and
you don't have access to the source,
you want to wrap it up and put it inside
an SWT plug-in or an RCP application,
you can do that.
[Transcript missing]
All right, so I'm going to quit that.
And you will notice that
our application is hung.
I'm calling that out for a reason because
we're going to go back to the slides now.
and I want to let you know that when
we release this and it's out there,
there are a few things
you want to be aware of.
First of all,
keep in mind that the SWT event
loop is the toolkit thread.
The SWT is pulling events off
with Carbon and dispatching
them to Windows directly.
Because of that,
we have a rule in the AWT that you
should not manipulate AWT objects from
the SWT thread or the toolkit thread.
This is all well documented
in technical note TN2147.
I recommend that you go look at
that if you're going to develop a
plug-in or anything that's going
to use the bridge because that's
got lots of good information.
As you're reading through
that technical note,
keep in mind that when
you're in SWT code,
think of yourself as in the
Cocoa layer that that document
talks about or in the Cocoa thread.
Alright?
So that means that, um,
Sorry, back up one step there.
So that means you're going to
need things like invoke later
to when you call an AWT object,
when you make a call to manipulate that.
Don't bring up a modal dialogue from
an SWT button because once you do that,
nothing's dispatching events
anymore and you're going to hang.
You're going to get a
nice spinning beach ball.
Those are the two main things
you've got to look out for.
Right now you've got to use system.exit
if you're writing an SWT application.
Don't do this in a plug-in.
Nobody wants your plugin
bringing down Eclipse.
You don't really need
it in Eclipse itself.
But if you're writing a
standalone application,
you will need it for a while.
The application pack, well,
what we call the application,
the SWT compatibility pack,
is built into Leopard.
No additional downloads will be needed.
I do know it's in Java SE 6.
I think it's in Java 5.
After testing yesterday,
I'm not so sure now.
But it will be in the final version.
There will not be any
extra downloads needed.
We're just going to build it.
Build it in.
In Tiger, it will be in our Java SES.
It's in our developer previews already.
It's already built into that,
and that will continue to
be the case down the road.
Things I'm describing here, you know,
about system.exit and, you know,
the toolkit thread and those issues,
we consider those bugs.
We know about them.
We're working to fix them.
We hope to have it taken care of
by Leopard when it finally ships.
We know about this,
but keep in mind that it's
largely a compatibility thing
with Windows to do it that way.
If you look at some
documentation on the AWT,
they will also tell you to, you know,
if you're using JNI,
don't manipulate your code from
Windows from Win32 event handlers,
for example.
So what I'm saying is
technically consistent.
You're often lucky that it works.
[Transcript missing]
But it's there.
We're going to keep
maintaining it and updating it.
And we want to continue to let you
use this product on Mac OS X because
we think it's important.
All right.
So that's a little bit of the
details on where we've come so far.
Part of building that bridge layer
involved me contributing a chunk
back to Eclipse that implemented
the SWT portion of that bridge.
And in doing so,
I got to learn a few things about how
will be talking about how the
contribution process works in the SWT.
So the SWT on Mac OS X
We know a lot of things about it,
of course, right?
It's open source.
I've already told you
it's based on Carbon.
You can go get the code and
you'll see what it looks like,
how it's using Carbon.
There are a few things
that are less widely known,
for lack of a better word.
If I want to get involved,
the standard mantra in an
open source project is,
if you don't like it, submit a patch.
Right?
That's what real programmers
do in an open source project.
You submit a patch.
Well, okay.
How do I do that?
I don't know.
You just learn, right?
Otherwise,
you'll never get into that inner circle
of people working on the project.
How can I contribute?
Well, you do this, that,
and the other thing.
I don't know.
Well, today,
I had the luxury of having
somebody show me how to do this,
and I thought it would be beneficial for
all you guys to learn how to do this too.
So I have invited Steve Northover,
technical lead from the
SWT and Sileni Quarti,
one of the engineers who works
on the Carbon pieces of the SWT,
to come up here and we're going to show
you how to contribute back to the SWT.
We're going to fix a bug right
here and show you the process,
and hopefully you can get involved
too if you're a Carbon developer.
So guys, come on up.
- Switch to demo?
- We are there.
- Well, first things first,
I'm gonna take these shoes off.
My shoes GP'd this morning on the way.
Goddamn Microsoft shoes.
So we're going to fix a bug.
So one of the interesting things about
Eclipse and SWT is it's open source and
all of the work happens out of Bugzilla.
And when I was with Scott at Java 1,
we just went searching for
a bug for Scott to fix.
Scott's a Carbon expert.
And so, you know,
the place where you find
bugs to fix is in Bugzilla.
So go to Bugzilla.
And we were just searching
around for something to fix.
And so we looked for Cursor.
So, but select the OS Mac, right,
so that we don't get every
cursor bug in the world.
And we kind of looked down the
menu to see what's a good one.
And Column Resize Cursor
shows it wrong position.
So we just grabbed on that one.
One of the things you might
want to-- why would you want to
contribute to SWT or Eclipse?
Well, you're using Eclipse.
And there's a bug.
And it's driving you crazy.
And it's not getting fixed fast enough.
Or you have an RCP app.
And it's holding you up.
And it's still not
getting fixed fast enough.
And the best way to get something fixed
is the squeaky wheel gets the grease.
And if you embarrass us with
code or some patch or a fix,
that causes us to go into action.
Bug Report comes with
a nice test case in it.
So we grab that test
code and paste it in.
It should show the problem,
whatever that is.
I suppose we can go through there.
I think an important thing
to note is run the test case.
Just sort of an aside here is
that Steve looked at it and said,
oh, yeah, we'll just go run the examples.
And now that's got a table in it.
We can just do it there.
So we ran it.
Oh, can't reproduce it.
Won't fix.
Works for me.
So we're on the verge of
marking it as won't fix.
And then, oh,
maybe we should actually run the code.
Yeah.
Very important.
So one of the things you'll notice
that Sileni is doing here is he's
building and running it is that,
um,
We're not showing it to you here,
but one thing you have to do is
set the build path as part of
building anything that uses the SWT.
Before we go on, did everybody have a
chance to download the SWT?
Did anybody try to do that
or take a look at that?
Okay.
If you're able to follow
those instructions,
you should at least be well enough
along that you can run a sample
application like this against the
code that you just downloaded.
So if you set the build path to
include the org-eclipse.swt project,
this is just going to, you know,
all the imports will resolve
and you'll be able to run,
and here we go.
So now let's see if we
can reproduce this bug.
Oh, look at there.
We were on the resize
portion of that table view,
but now we're sort of
off and up to the left,
up and to the left a little bit,
and it's changing.
In fact, actually,
it's doing more than that.
It's changing at the wrong place,
but it's also flickering
back and forth to a pointer.
So when I see that sort of thing,
it's like, you know,
it looks like an off by the inset, right?
Because it's changing.
If I move that table up a bit,
the resize bar would
be in the right place.
So, like,
how do you set the cursor in SWT?
Well, there's a method,
control.setCursor,
so Silenio will go and get that.
Go to Control,
which it's there already for you,
and get to Set Cursor.
Somebody, oh, OK.
Fine.
And there's a great wad of crap.
And oh, look at all that Carbon.
I wish I had Time Machine to go
back and have it all be Cocoa.
Time Machine actually could be really
useful to go back to high school.
But anyways, down at the bottom,
after all that rubbish,
is Handle Control Set Cursor.
And that's the Carbon API that
changes the cursor for you.
Just real quick,
let's call out how you're
using Carbon here directly.
You see these OS dot whatever.
Those are direct calls into Carbon.
If you look down underneath,
there'll be a dot C file that
has all these Carbon API calls.
And all we're doing is we're
taking Java data types,
marshaling them to a Carbon call,
calling that call directly,
and coming right back.
One for one.
And so that's one of the reasons
why Scott could help out right away,
because it was just a
bunch of Carbon calls.
He's a Carbon expert.
And he could see what-- I mean, Modulo,
the piles of goo, he could see what was
going on in the code.
And so we do references to this guy.
So I know in that example code,
we weren't actually setting the cursor.
The cursor is being changed
automatically by-- or it's
being changed inside of Carbon.
So do references of this thing.
and I happen to know that it's actually
in this method in display run inter-exit
that runs as part of the event loop,
so the cursor gets set.
So we'll go to that one.
Are we on it?
Yep.
And there's a bunch of
mouse still down and blah,
blah, blah, blah, blah,
but there we're getting the window
bounce and we won't bother going,
but we can go get the documentation for
handle control set cursor and it's going
to tell us that under compositing mode,
Yes.
it wants to have the point
in terms of the control,
not in terms of the window.
Of the H.I.
view as opposed to, yeah.
So there's our bug right there and we
had the indication of it because of
the sort of off by the size of the,
or the inset.
So, Sileni was going to go and
grab the fix which we can,
you know,
We could generate if you want.
The Food Network method of
code demonstration here.
We go to the oven and
bring you the final copy.
Prebaked.
And I guess we have--
we run both compositing.
We've foolishly called the variable
that controls that high view,
which should be called
compositing or whatever.
But anyway, so we run-- the toolkit runs
compositing and not compositing,
because I guess we ran
before there was compositing.
That's right.
You've been around long before
the new HIV modes were around.
Although Eclipse wouldn't
officially support us.
We've been running-- we had a
Mac board for quite a while.
But anyways,
so there's the HIV compositing case.
And we convert the point and then send
that off to handle control set cursor.
So Sonia will save that stuff.
What we were doing effectively was a
global to local in the old port thinking.
But now we have to actually convert
it to the coordinate system.
So we're going to do that.
And then we're going to do the same
thing with the Eclipse system of the HIV.
So that's what we're doing here.
And unfortunately,
there's a very cool call in
10.4 that does this in one step.
But Eclipse, remember,
Eclipse works back through 10.3.
10.3.9, at least.
Yeah, we-- Officially.
So any patches you make
need to work against 10.3.9,
at
So we save the code, rerun it.
Notice we're not building it.
We don't build any C files or nothing
because there's no C code there.
It's all the one-to-one mapping.
And there we go, and we move.
Hey, look at that.
You guys are good.
All right.
So, that's typical.
There's two managers and
one guy doing the work.
Yep.
Is this mic even turned on?
No.
So there, I fixed a bug.
But did you really fix it?
Well, did I really fix it?
Okay.
So what else is wrong?
Anybody from the audience?
Did we actually fix this?
We fixed the test case, but...
Well, we can check it in.
That would be fine too.
But there's a bunch of things.
I mean, just fixing the one case,
did we put other stuff out?
There were other references to handle,
set cursor, control, whatever,
and we need to check
all of those references.
If we made the mistake of not
converting the coordinates in one place,
we may make the mistake
in multiple places.
So there's that.
And then,
did we break setting cursors for tables
or for every control in the universe?
So there's a bunch of more.
Also,
we need to run the JUnit test case to see
if we put something else out of whack.
So there's a bunch of more
stuff that needs to happen.
But as a guy contributing to Eclipse,
like just a random person,
you made the patch, you fixed it,
and you want to give us the code.
And I mean, if you submit a patch
that fixes the test case,
I mean, we will take that patch,
but we'll also evaluate it in
terms of the whole toolkit,
which as a guy,
until you're more familiar
with a large code base,
and then we'll see.
Until you're more familiar with it,
you're not going to know all the
places where you need to change.
However,
getting to the place where the bug is and
showing us the fix is 99.9% of the work,
and it's amazing, right?
And in this particular project,
I have noticed that if you submit a patch
that's not 100%, Steve's actually pretty
good about writing you back and saying,
well, you did, but you didn't do this
other thing over here.
He's very nice about it.
This is really my first
involvement with it.
It's an open source project,
and that was encouraging to me.
So, I don't know.
I think it's a good thing.
The ultimate goal is that your
patches get better and better
to a point where it's just a
matter of checking in the code.
And at that point,
when the patches are right
and all the cases are covered,
the person is really
familiar with the code base.
And at that point,
we vote for commit rights.
And it's like three committers
have to say plus one.
You vote for a commit right.
And then it's because it
becomes more of an annoyance
to submit your fix to go and,
oh,
Scott knows what he's doing or whatever.
Go and change the code and fix it, right?
Yeah.
But that's a relationship that is,
you know, it's actually a personal
relationship with the individual.
Like, commit rights are not for Apple.
The commit rights are for Scott or,
you know, the individual.
So, they go with the individual.
So, we've had people with
commit rights leave,
like some from IBM leave
and go to other places.
They don't lose their commit rights.
Right.
So, let's attach the patch.
Yep.
So we have to build the patch.
So we did a right click on that,
go to Team Create Patch.
And the way Bugzilla works
on OS X is that you've got to
write it out to a file first.
So we're going to save
it out to our desktop.
And you'll notice here that we're
actually hitting the CVS server,
getting a diff against the latest stuff,
and now putting that on the desktop.
And now it's time to
actually attach that patch.
So he's going to create an attachment.
Got to create, got to log in.
A login account for
Bugzilla on Eclipse is free.
Anybody can have one.
And it's useful if for no other
reason that you get to attach
yourself as a CC on a bug so that
you can watch the progress of it.
You got typers anxiety?
No.
All the people watching
your every keystroke?
There we go.
Hey, all right.
So we're gonna go find our file,
pick that patch.
Don't forget to mark patch.
It will complain.
Okay, we can put in the
comments that we can say,
I don't even,
we didn't check all the references.
Right.
This fixes the bug.
This fixes the bug and
that sort of thing.
But, I mean,
there was a slight chance that a
committer would have found this bug
and fixed it before this presentation,
which would have been disastrous
because it's all live.
But, I suppose we could have unfixed it.
[Transcript missing]
There we go.
So, message to himself, but anyways.
Okay.
And there you go.
That's sort of a look at
what a patch looks like.
It's basically a CVS code.
So that's how you do it.
I think everybody in this
room is capable of that,
and so that's something
you can get involved with.
Hey Steve,
you need a ride to the airport Thursday?
Nobody watch the Seinfeld, I guess.
I don't know.
All right.
So in summary,
as soon as I find my clicker.
The big thing to let you know is
that Eclipse is more than a Java IDE.
It's free.
You can download it.
There's lots of other
stuff you can do with it.
A lot of companies are building
products on top of the RCP and
the layers of the Eclipse.
3.2 is now available.
This was a simultaneous release
of all 10 separate projects.
Go take a look and see what's out there.
And Mac OS X is supported now.
So you can build an
RCP application for the Mac.
Apple is committed to
making Eclipse great.
We've already shipped an update
to make it work on Tiger.
We're building it into Leopard.
We are contributing.
We're going to support the
SW team as best we can.
The Carbon guys are involved as well.
We've got them looking at things
and providing feedback as well.
Because for everything that I look at,
Eric Schlegel and Guy Fullerton
look at it and just say,
"Oh yeah, that's it." So as a company,
we're committed to making this work.
You can help out too.
That was the big message for the
last part of our session today,
is that it's possible for
regular guys to get in there and,
you know,
get your arms dirty and make changes
and contribute back to the project.